So now that you know a bit
about the completable futures
framework, what its purpose
is, how it maps onto some
of the reactive programming
principles, let's
start to talk about the
pros and cons of synchrony.
And of course, to
do this, we're going
to have to start
off by explaining
what we mean by
synchrony and what we
mean by synchronous operations.
The good news is even
though you may or may not
be familiar with these
words, I guarantee you,
if you've done any
programming in the past,
you're very familiar
with these concepts.
Method calls in a
typical Java program
are largely synchronous.
For example, if you make a
call on a Java collection
like a HashMap or an
Array List, if you
think about the
behaviors that we
would pass into the typical
Java stream aggregate operation,
those are typically synchronous.
And what this means
is that the callee--
the operation that's called--
borrows the thread of
control of its caller
until its computation finishes.
So you can see here
is just an example.
We make a bunch of calls.
It's a sort of a
request/response nature
or an invocation
and return model.
And those are good
examples of two-way calls.
So let's talk about the
pros of this approach.
Well, first of all, it's
very, very intuitive
to program and debug.
Most people who've
programmed are
very familiar with these
common, two-way method
patterns-- the
invocation/return pattern
and the request/response
pattern.
That's just the
bread and butter.
Unless you started
out live programming
with Promises in JavaScript is
your first thing you've ever
done, you're probably very
familiar with this way
of writing code.
Another nice thing about this
is that the use of synchrony
allows the state that's part
of the context of the caller
to be retained when
the callee returns.
So what the heck does that
mean, and why is that a win?
Well, take a look at
a very simple example.
The whole point
here is the concept
of an activation record.
And an activation record is
simply a representation that
a compiler in a runtime
system uses to keep track
of the context in which a method
call executes on a runtime
stack in a stack-oriented
language like Java, or c++,
or C, or C#.
So the way this works, let's
take a look at a little example
called downloadContent.
This particular example
is going to take a URL
and return a byte array
that contains the contents
of whatever is at that URL.
And you'll notice
that everything
I've shown here in red is
an example of local context
or local state that's
stored in the activation
record of the download
content method call.
So buf is going to store a
new buffer of size, BUFSIZE.
Os is going to store a
ByteArrayOutputStream object.
Is is going to
store an openStream.
It's an input stream.
Bytes is a local loop counter.
And what you can see when
you say, is.read(buf),
you get back bytes.
You can see when you say
os.write(buf,0,bytes),
as those calls are
made-- as read is called,
as write is called--
when read is called, that
pushes a new activation record
on the top of the stack.
And when read is done,
it pops back off.
And is, and buf,
and bytes, and so on
will have the
appropriate values.
They won't disappear
after the method call,
and that's because local
caller state is retained
when the callee returns.
So that makes it very, very
simple to write your code.
You don't have to stash away
your state somewhere, make
an asynchronous call, when
the response comes back,
find that state from someplace,
restore it, reconstitute it,
and do the next thing.
It's all very intuitive.
However, there are some
cons with synchrony.
Probably the single
biggest problem
is that synchronous
programming may not
leverage all of the
parallelism that's
available in modern
multicore systems.
So you don't really
get the kinds
of speed-ups you might expect
without a lot of effort
on your part.
One reason for this is
that blocking threads--
especially blocking
threads in user code
or blocking threads in
user interface code--
incur a lot of overhead
due to synchronization,
context switching, data
movement, and memory management
costs.
And that's tricky enough.
The other problem, of
course, is that you often
don't know how many
threads to choose.
So let's say you're going
to write some code not
unlike the
ImageStreamGang example
that we talked about
when we were talking
about parallel
streams, where you're
going to download images using
streams and parallel streams.
Well, one of the
questions is, how big
should the pool of threads be?
If you make the pool
of threads very large,
then that may make your
program run really fast,
but you may end up
wasting resources.
If you make the pool
of threads very small,
then you may end up
conserving resources,
but your program may not
run very fast because you're
underutilizing the CPU.
And obviously, this becomes very
tricky for I/O-bound programs
that typically need more
threads to run efficiently.
Now, there's all kinds
of work arounds for this.
We've talked about
things like setting
the common fork-join
pool size via a property.
We also talked about using
the ManageBlocker mechanisms
in order to do that, but it
requires some extra thought
and sometimes is more than
you really want to deal with.
This whole issue of changing
the size of the pools
is hard because,
as we saw, setting
the system properties is
tricky, and it doesn't really
work after you've initialize
the fork-join pool.
You could also use that
ManageBlocker approach,
but that only works with
a common fork-join pool.
So you're kind of forced
into this Procrustean bed.
So the bottom line here is
that synchrony doesn't really
come for free, and it
can be tricky to program
if your goal is to
maximize utilization.